.\" To display this man page, either:
.\"   1) Install this file along with the other subject.1 files in your
.\"      system's man1 directory (usually this is /usr/man/man1) and
.\"      enter the command:
.\"        man mumps
.\"   or
.\"   2) Specify the input (this file) and the output (your favorite pager)
.\"      explicitly.  For example, if this file is in your current working
.\"      directory, you can use the following to view the formatted man page
.\"      using the "less" pager:
.\"        man ./mumps.1 | less
.\"
.\" To print this man page to a PostScript printer:
.\"   man -t ./mumps.1 | lpr
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" FreeM Copyright based on FreeMUMPS Copyright
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1998 MUG Deutschland
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the  "Software"),
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
.\" Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE MUG DEUTSCHLAND BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY,
.\" WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
.\" SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name of the FreeMUMPS shall not
.\" be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other
.\" dealings in this Software without prior written authorization from MUG
.\" Deutschland.
.\"
.TH FreeM 1 "19 January 1999" Linux "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
mumps, gl, locks, gcompact, gverify, fix, grestore \- a Free M system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mumps
.sp
.B gl [-k] [-d] [-n] [^]
.I global
.br
.B glocks [
.I -pid
.B ] [
.I lockfile
.B ]
.br
.B gcompact [^]
.I global
.br
.B gverify [^]
.I global
.br
.B gfix [^]
.I global
.br
.B grestore [^]
.I global
.SH DESCRIPTION of mumps
The
.B mumps ,
program runs an instance of
.IR "FreeM.  "
This program is full of pleasant surprises.  The source code is well
commented and currently serves as the primary documentation, along with
the README file supplied with this distribution.  Much needs to be said
here about features, limitations, etc.  Whoever designed and wrote this
system deserves a standing ovation from M-sters worldwide.  
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "none at present"
.SH DESCRIPTION of gl
.PP
The
.B gl
utility program lists the specified global to standard output.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP -k
Show global keys alone on a separate line.
.IP -d
Show global data alone on a separate line
.IP -n
Show global keys and data, each on a separate line, with the keys in naked
naked indicator form relative to the previous key.
.IP
If none of these switches is supplied, the output has each node's key and
data on the same line separated by an "=".  The -k and -d switches may be
combined as -kd to output keys and data on alternating lines.
.SH DESCRIPTION of locks
The
.B locks
utility program lists the contents of the locktable to standard output.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP -pid
If the proccess id of a running mumps process is supplied, all lock
entries created by that process will be cleared from the locktable.
.IP lockfile
If an alternate lockfile is specifed on the command line, it will be
referenced by
.B locks
rather than the normal default lockfile ( /var/tmp/locktab ).
.SH DESCRIPTION of gcompact
The
.B gcompact
utility program compacts the specifed global in place.
.SH DESCRIPTION of gverify
The
.B gverify
utility program verifies and validates the specifed global, checking for
database anomalies.
.SH DESCRIPTION of gfix
The
.B gfix
interactive utility program permits navigation of the B\-tree structure
of the specifed global a block at a time.
.SH DESCRIPTION grestore
The
.B grestore
utility program will fix problems with the specified global.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
I'm not sure what the return values of any of these programs is.  Something to add here.
.SH FILES
.I /usr/bin/mumps
.RS
The executable program that provides MUMPS interpreter, global and other services.
.RE
.I ./login.m
.RS
The first routine executed when
.B mumps
is run.  If login.mps exits with a
.I Halt
command, the
.B mumps
program stops (so we have a user mode), otherwise,
.B mumps
enters programmer mode.
.RE
.I ./bench.m
.RS
A benchmark routine which times multiple execution of various core operations.
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
There may be some environment variables that affect the operation of these programs.
.SH BUGS
There are a few.
.SH AUTHOR
Provided by Shalom ha-Ashkenaz, 1998/06/18 CE, to the stewardship of the
MUMPS Users Group - Deutschland.
.br
The author's identity is a mystery.  Can anyone shed light on this?
.br
Man page written by Ron Fox (rfox@dls.queens.org)
.SH COPYRIGHT
See COPYRIGHT document included with the distribution (and embedded in the
.I troff
source of this man page.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR gcompact (1),
.BR gfix (1),
.BR gl (1),
.BR glocks (1),
.BR grestore (1),
.BR gverify (1),
.BR mumps (1)
